407440_167381
Csajka Chantal
Review: 1
Application data
Applicant(s)
Csajka, Chantal
Lang, Pierre-Olivier / Lovis, Christian / Le Pogam, Marie Annick / Beeler, Patrick
Automated detection of adverse drug events from older inpatients’ electronic medical records 
using structured data mining and natural language processing
NRP 74: Full Proposal
Detailed evaluation
 
 
 
Scientific quality and originality
 
The project is underpinned by a very strong clinical rationale explained in a very accurate background 
section. The scope of the project is to identify predictors of adverse drug events associated to the use of 
anti-thrombotic therapies and strenghten detection tools by adding text mining to the usual modelling 
techniques, based on retrospective hospital data of relevant subjects. The scope and research questions 
addressed by the project are relevant.
The Delphi method adopted for the selection of relevant characteristics is appropriate and scientifically 
sound.
However, the computational algorithms proposed for the structured and unstructured data mining are 
absolutely unclear. In particular, the referee could not assess whether the predictive models would be 
based on regression modelling, or any other approach.
The sample size calculation method does not seem sufficiently clear, stable and objective. The final 
estimates are based on comparisons extracted from a table that presents different values, based on the 
arguable target of confidence intervals with a 20% width. Firstly, such confidence intervals seem too 
wide to guarantee the required stability required to validate the text based algorithm as opposed to the 
structured format. Secondly, and most importantly, the method takes into account only one aspect of 
reliability, i.e. sensitivity, while more complete assessment might be performed using approaches eg 
likelihood ratio or ROC curve, which take simultaneously into both sensitivity and specificity. Finally, 
traditional techniques embedding the calculation of adequate power would lead to more objective 
selection of minimal sample size.
Use of de-identified data may not necessarily imply no risks for privacy and data protection, given the 
level of detail required by the collection of individual characteristics that would allow re-identification. 
The challenges involved with these problems are not sufficiently addressed in the proposal. The ethical 
committee should consider whether patient consent would be required for the conduction of this study.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inter- and transdisciplinarity
 
The project team involves experts with background in pharmacology, clinical research and medical 
informatics, which seems quite appropriate for the scope. However, given the methodological challenges 
12.10.2016 11:40:36
Swiss National Science Fondation  |  2
Csajka Chantal 
Review of application 407440_167381
involved in this project, it would have been really beneficial to have a co-applicant with strong statistical 
background who does not show up in the list. The lack of specialistic expertise in this field is reflected by 
the limitations highlighted in the methodology of this proposal.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application and implementation
 
The implementation plan is adequate as it involves aspects of relevant interest for patient safety eg 
indicators, guidelines and open source assessment forms.However, the central element involving the 
analysis of medical texts, and how this would be transferred to the coalface in health services, is not 
sufficiently explained.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Personnel and infrastructure
 
The personnel and infrastructure is adequate for the scope of the project.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Feasibility within the set timeframe and budget
 
The project seems feasible within the set timeframe and budget of the proposal.
 
 
 
Comment
 
The project aims to respond to a very relevant clinical question regarding the safety of antithrombotic 
drugs, proposing a targeted solution that can improve the detection tools available for adverse drug 
events. The proposed method of using retrospective analysis of structured as well as unstructured data 
can deliver a novel mixed approach that would maximise the information available. The design is 
supported by a Delphi method that is appropriate to identify the key elements for the proposed study. 
These are clear strengths that are worth to be outlined.
 
However, major weaknesses affect the overall score:
Computational algorithms proposed for the structured and unstructured data mining are absolutely 
unclear.
Sample size calculation methods do not seem sufficiently clear, stable and objective. Other methods 
based on summary elements eg likelihood ratios, ROC curve and power calculations would have been 
preferable.
Ethical challenges in the management of individual level data should have been better explained
How the analysis of medical text would be transferred in health services is not explained.
The absence of a co-applicant with strong biostatistical background is a noticeable pitfall in the 
composition of the project team, which might have negatively influenced the accuracy of the 
methodological section.
 
12.10.2016 11:40:36
Swiss National Science Fondation  |  3
Csajka Chantal 
Review of application 407440_167381
 
 
