RESEARCH
Open Access
OAE: The Ontology of Adverse Events
Yongqun He1*, Sirarat Sarntivijai1,2, Yu Lin1, Zuoshuang Xiang1, Abra Guo1, Shelley Zhang1, Desikan Jagannathan1,
Luca Toldo3, Cui Tao4 and Barry Smith5
Abstract
Background: A medical intervention is a medical procedure or application intended to relieve or prevent illness or
injury. Examples of medical interventions include vaccination and drug administration. After a medical intervention,
adverse events (AEs) may occur which lie outside the intended consequences of the intervention. The representation
and analysis of AEs are critical to the improvement of public health.
Description: The Ontology of Adverse Events (OAE), previously named Adverse Event Ontology (AEO), is a
community-driven ontology developed to standardize and integrate data relating to AEs arising subsequent to
medical interventions, as well as to support computer-assisted reasoning. OAE has over 3,000 terms with unique
identifiers, including terms imported from existing ontologies and more than 1,800 OAE-specific terms. In OAE, the
term ‘adverse event’ denotes a pathological bodily process in a patient that occurs after a medical intervention.
Causal adverse events are defined by OAE as those events that are causal consequences of a medical intervention. OAE
represents various adverse events based on patient anatomic regions and clinical outcomes, including symptoms, signs,
and abnormal processes. OAE has been used in the analysis of several different sorts of vaccine and drug adverse event
data. For example, using the data extracted from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS), OAE was used
to analyse vaccine adverse events associated with the administrations of different types of influenza vaccines. OAE has
also been used to represent and classify the vaccine adverse events cited in package inserts of FDA-licensed human
vaccines in the USA.
Conclusion: OAE is a biomedical ontology that logically defines and classifies various adverse events occurring after
medical interventions. OAE has successfully been applied in several adverse event studies. The OAE ontological
framework provides a platform for systematic representation and analysis of adverse events and of the factors
(e.g., vaccinee age) important for determining their clinical outcomes.
Keywords: Ontology of Adverse Events, OAE, Adverse event, Ontology, Vaccine, Drug, Vaccine adverse event, VAERS,
Drug adverse event, Design pattern
Background
A medical intervention is a medical procedure or appli-
cation intended to relieve or prevent illness or injury.
The medical intervention can be an administration of a
drug, a vaccine, a special nutritional product (for example,
a medical food supplement), or it can be the use of a
medical device. In the wake of a medical intervention,
adverse events (AEs) may occur which lie outside the
intended consequences of the intervention. These AEs
are pathological bodily processes [1]. Severe AEs include
triggering of Guillain-Barre or Stevens-Johnson Syndrome
paralysis and, in extreme cases, death. Such AEs may
result in hospitalization of the patient and requiring spe-
cial care. Although typically having low incidence rates,
they may impact the usage or regulation of vaccine, drug,
or medical devices in the market. To monitor and investi-
gate adverse events of various types, reporting systems
have been established to collect the relevant information.
For example, the USA national vaccine safety surveillance
programs include the Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting
System (VAERS) [2] and the Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) Adverse Events Reporting System (FAERS) [3],
established, respectively, for the spontaneous reporting of
vaccine and of drug-associated AEs.
To improve representation and organization of adverse
event information, efforts have been undertaken over the
years to develop different vocabulary resources, including
* Correspondence: yongqunh@med.umich.edu
1University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
JOURNAL OF
BIOMEDICAL SEMANTICS
© 2014 He et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA)
[4], the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
(CTCAE) [5], and the World Health Organization (WHO)’s
Adverse Reaction Terminology (WHO-ART) [6]. MedDRA
is an adverse event coding vocabulary preferred by the FDA
and utilized by VAERS and FAERS, as well as many clinical
trials. CTCAE, a product of the USA National Cancer Insti-
tute (NCI), is a standardised vocabulary used in assessing
AEs associated with drugs for cancer therapy. WHO-ART
is a dictionary maintained by the WHO to serve as a basis
for rational coding of adverse reaction terms.
While these resources have played a central role in
standardizing and improving AE vocabulary use world-
wide, their lack of text definitions and logical classification
hierarchies poses problems for automatic search and re-
trieval and for computational analysis and aggregation [7].
The Ontology for Adverse Events (OAE) is designed to
address these issues by providing logically well-formed
definitions and an associated structured classification.
These definitions and classification function as the
“abstraction” of the information from highly specific
“particular” (or “instance”) adverse events to more general
“universals” (or “classes”) that show commonalities often
not obvious from individual data. As first illustrated in [8]
and discussed also below, the application of OAE appears
to support reasonable classification and analysis of the
vaccine adverse events (VAE) reported in the clinical VAE
case report system. MedDRA and other classical systems
focus on the representation of the symptoms or diseases
that are the adverse event outcomes of clinical findings.
They, thus, do not take into account other elements (e.g.,
patient age) of the process that leads from initial medical
intervention to subsequent outcomes. The OAE is de-
signed to serve as a complementary resource that will
fill this gap of treatment-clinical observation association
by providing a means of linking the content coded by
these systems to other relevant biological and clinical
information.
Biomedical ontologies are consensus-based controlled
vocabularies of entities and relations modelling a part of
the biomedical world, which are represented in both
computer and human interpretable forms. They thus go
further in providing support for computational analysis of
data than the existing vocabulary resources. The Adverse
Event Ontology (AEO) was initially developed by transfer-
ring those ontology terms representing vaccine adverse
events from the Vaccine Ontology (VO) [9,10]. The top
level AEO adverse event representation was also partially
based on the work conducted in the European ReMINE
project [11]. In our previous AEO paper [12], we defined
the term ‘adverse event’ as: a pathological bodily process
that is induced by a medical intervention. This definition
in the previous version of the ontology of AEs assumed a
causal association between an adverse event and a medical
intervention. A problem with this definition is that it does
not align with the common usage of the term ‘adverse
event’ in medical, pharmacological and public health
contexts, where it is generally impractical to distinguish
the causal adverse consequences from all the bodily pro-
cesses that unfold in a patient temporally subsequent to
a given medical intervention. The FAERS and VAERS
systems thus state explicitly that they make no assump-
tion of a causal relation between an adverse event and a
medical intervention. The assumption of causality in our
preceding ontology would imply too large a gap between
the ontology and actual practice. Above all, this assump-
tion would make it difficult to use the term ‘adverse event’
to represent individual cases, since the existence of a
causal relation is in many cases hard to verify. Further-
more, due to a name conflict with the “Anatomical Entity
Ontology” that has the same abbreviation “AEO”, our
Adverse Event Ontology (AEO) was renamed the Ontology
of Adverse Events (OAE) in the Fall of 2011. In OAE,
‘adverse event’ (OAE_0000001) is defined as to assume
no causal association, while those adverse events for
which there is a causal association with an intervention
are defined as a subclass of ‘adverse event’ and named as
‘causal adverse event’ (OAE_0000003). The latter term is to
be used only when there is definitive evidence (including
biological and statistical evidences) to assert such a causal
association under specified conditions. We contend that
with this change the OAE becomes more robust as a repre-
sentation of the domain of adverse event reporting.
In addition, other updates have been made to the OAE
as compared to the original AEO. A large number of new
OAE terms derived from a number of use cases have been
added. Different ways of representing and analyzing the
causal association between AEs and medical interventions
have been classified and represented in OAE, and the
ontology has also been used in several studies, which will
be introduced in this paper.
Breadth and Scope
The OAE ontology is a community-based biomedical
ontology in the domain of adverse events. OAE clearly
differentiates adverse event and causal adverse event,
with the latter a subtype of the former. A major effort in
OAE is to represent ontologically various AEs on anatomic
locations and adverse outcomes (including symptoms,
signs, and processes). OAE includes many logic definitions
formulated by using terms from existing ontologies (for
example the UBERON anatomy ontology). This strategy
links OAE with established ontologies and supports
computer-assisted integration and reasoning. Since OAE
defines an adverse event as a process subsequent to a
medical intervention, the ontology provides a logical first
step in the representation of this whole process. Such onto-
logical definition allows the development and application of
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 2 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
new analysis methods to better understanding the mecha-
nisms of adverse events associated with or induced by
different medical interventions. OAE also provides a
framework for recording and analyzing the associations
recorded on product labels for example between vaccine
or drug administration and medically relevant events.
The scope of OAE is very specific and should not be
confused with other relevant ontologies. OAE does not
target adverse event reporting by following the pattern
of the existing Adverse Event Reporting Ontology
(AERO) which focuses on the ontological representation
of the vaccine AE data or information using the Brighton
vaccine AE definitions [13]. Unlike OAE, AERO does not
define ‘adverse event’ as a pathological bodily process. By
following the principle of ontological realism we argue
that the representation of data should be built as far as
possible on the real-world entities to which such data re-
late. Finally, OAE is not an ontology of symptoms or signs
as the indications of illness or diseases. The appearance
of various symptoms or signs (e.g., fever) is rather an
outcome of an adverse event, thus denoted by the suffix
“AE” (e.g., a fever adverse event or “fever AE”).
Authority and provenance of OAE
OAE targets two communities: the adverse event com-
munity and the OBO Foundry ontology community. As
concerns the former, we have focused our ontology de-
velopment on two important research communities,
targeting vaccine adverse events and drug adverse events,
respectively, and our team includes experts in both of
these areas. For example, Dr. Yongqun He (co-author) is a
domain expert in vaccinology, vaccine adverse events, and
ontology development [8,14]. Dr. Luca Toldo (co-author)
is an expert in drug adverse events [15-17]. Expanding the
OAE ontological analysis of VAERS data [8], Dr. Sirarat
Sarntivijai is now expanding and applying OAE and ontol-
ogy knowledge mapping to represent and analyze drug-
associated AEs in her systems pharmacology research.
Her OAE research has obtained strong support and
collaboration from clinical experts at the FDA’ Office
of Clinical Pharmacology. As an ontology in the OBO
Foundry ontology library, the development of OAE fol-
lows the OBO Foundry principles [18]. Dr. Barry Smith
(co-author) is the founder of the Basic Formal Ontol-
ogy (BFO) and also the one of the founders of the OBO
Foundry. Our core development team has also in-
cluded experts in semantics web (Dr. Cui Tao), medical
informatics (Yu Lin, MD, PhD), software developer
(Zuoshuang Xiang), and many students. Our developmen-
tal effort has received technical supports from both the
adverse event community and the OBO Foundry ontology
community, as demonstrated by positive feedbacks we
received from three recent international adverse event
related workshops [19-21].
As described above, the OAE was originally derived
from the vaccine adverse event branch of the Vaccine
Ontology (VO) [9,10] and from the European ReMINE
project [11]. New OAE adverse event terms have been
generated on the basis of clinical adverse event reports
in the VAERS [22] and the FDA [3]. We have referenced
MedDRA in our OAE development by cross-referencing
related MedDRA identifiers. The data models of adverse
event analysis provided by the Clinical Data Interchange
Consortium (CDISC) [23] were also referenced. Peer-
reviewed journal articles have been used wherever possible
as references for adverse event terms included in OAE.
Construction and content
OAE development methods and statistics
The development of OAE follows the OBO Foundry prin-
ciples, including openness, collaboration, and use of a
common shared syntax [18]. We also adhere to the princi-
ples of ontological realism [24]. OAE is aligned with the
Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) (http://www.ifomis.org/bfo)
version 2.0.
The latest OAE is available for public view and download
at http://sourceforge.net/projects/oae/. The Web Ontology
Language (OWL) is used as representation language and
the ontology is edited using the Protégé 4 Ontology Editor
(http://protege.stanford.edu). For adverse event-specific
terms, new identifiers with the “OAE_” prefix plus seven-
digit auto-incremental numbers were generated. OntoFox
(http://ontofox.hegroup.org/) [25] was used to extract
ontology terms from external ontologies and import
them into the OAE where needed.
As of April 20, 2014, OAE has 3,086 terms (or called
representational units) (Table 1). To support ontology
term reuse and interoperability, OAE imports terms that
are available in established ontologies. The terms from
existing ontologies are imported in two different ways:
one is to import the whole ontology (here BFO and RO);
the other is to import individual terms from existing on-
tologies using OntoFox [25]. In accordance with the OBO
Foundry Principles, we need to share development effort
with other ontology initiatives. It is noted that imported
terms keep their original IDs. By using the OntoFox soft-
ware [25], the relations between imported entity terms
and the entity properties are also retained. The OAE-
specific terms include 1,834 classes and three object
properties (Table 1). Compared to the 484 ontology terms
included in the last AEO publication in 2011 [12], 2,602
new terms (over fivefold more terms) have been added to
OAE, representing significant progress of the ontology.
OAE design patterns of adverse events and causal
adverse events
Basic Formal Ontology (BFO; http://www.ifomis.org/
bfo) is a small, upper level ontology provides a common
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 3 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
ontological architecture for a series of domain ontologies
at different levels of granularity [24,26]. BFO has been
used by more than 100 ontologies belonging to scientific
and other domains and the alignment with BFO makes
OAE compatible with other BFO-based ontologies in the
biomedical field. BFO includes two branches: the continu-
ant branch, representing types of entities that persist
through time while preserving their identity; and the oc-
current branch, representing entities (such as processes
and the temporal regions they occupy) that have temporal
parts and unfold or develop through time.
In OAE, the term ‘adverse event’ is defined as: a patho-
logical bodily process (OGMS_0000060) that occurs after
a medical intervention. The term ‘pathological bodily
process’ is taken from the Ontology for General Medical
Science (OGMS), where it represents a bodily process that
is clinically abnormal [1]. OGMS, too, is a BFO-aligned
ontology. OGMS: pathological bodily process is a subtype
of BFO:process. The ‘medical intervention’ is a planned
process (also a subtype of BFO:process) that has the goal
of diagnosing, preventing or relieving illness or injury. We
originally developed this term in OAE and have proposed
to transfer this term to OGMS.
An adverse event is part of a process that starts when
a medical intervention is conducted and involves some
observation event in which a clinical outcome is observed
or detected (Figure 1). Note that Additional file 1: Table S1
and Additional file 2: Table S2 provide detailed information
about the classes and relations used in all the figures
presented in this manuscript. In simplified terms we
have the following elements:
(1) p1: a medical intervention (for example, an act
of vaccination);
(2) pa: a patient;
(3) t1: the time at which the medical intervention occurs;
(4) p2: a process leading to a clinically abnormal outcome;
(5) t2: the time at which the clinically abnormal
outcome (e.g., fever) is first manifested.
Both medical intervention (p1) and adverse event (p2)
are subclasses of BFO process with instances occurring
at specific BFO:temporal regions. The difference between
p1 and p2 is that medical intervention is a process that
is planned by some human being (thus it is an OBI:
planned process) and implemented on a patient (pa),
Table 1 Summary of ontology terms in OAE or imported from existing ontologies as of April 20, 2014
Ontology names
Classes
Object properties
Datatype properties
Annotation properties
Total
OAE
1830
4
0
0
1834
BFO (Basic Formal Ontology)
37
83
0
2
122
BSPO (Spatial Ontology)
0
13
0
0
13
DOID (Disease Ontology)
1
0
0
0
1
IAO (Information Artifact Ontology)
8
1
0
16
25
OBI (Ontology for Biomedical Investigations)
11
7
0
2
20
OGMS (Ontology for General Medical Science)
4
0
0
0
4
PATO (Phenotypic Quality Ontology)
0
0
0
3
3
RO (Relation Ontology)
0
20
0
1
21
UBERON (Uber Anatomy Ontology)
883
0
0
0
883
VO (Vaccine Ontology)
7
0
0
0
7
Other ontologies*
27
56
1
70
241
Total
2808
183
1
94
3,088
Note: *the name and statistics of other ontologies used in OAE can be found on the Ontobee website: http://www.ontobee.org/ontostat.php?ontology=OAE.
Figure 1 Basic design pattern of OAE ‘adverse event’ and
‘causal adverse event’. All terms inside boxes are ontology classes,
and the other terms are ontology relations. The is-kind-of (i.e., rdfs:
subClassOf) relations are highlighted with bold font. The other relations
come from OAE or other existing ontologies. The detailed information
of the class and relation terms used in this figure is available in Additional
file 1: Table S1 and Additional file 2: Table S2.
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 4 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
while an adverse event is an unplanned (unintended)
event that is subsequent thereto. The temporal region at
which the medical intervention occurs in a given patient
is always earlier than the temporal region at which the
adverse event occurs: t1 precedes t2. Therefore, the
adverse event p1 is preceded by the medical intervention
p2. It is noted that the clinical abnormal outcomes may
have different types, including symptom (for example,
rash), sign (for example, white blood cell count decreased),
or process (for example, bacterial infection).
Both ‘adverse event’ and ‘causal adverse event’ are used
in relation to events occurring after a medical interven-
tion. The major difference between them is that the latter
is used if and only if it has been established that the event
in question occurred as a result of (was caused by) this
intervention. Thus the term ‘causal adverse event’ repre-
sents the existence of data of a certain sort, namely data
establishing a causal association between these two pro-
cesses (Figures 1 and 2). The causal relation is represented
by the object property term ‘induced_by’ (occurs as a
causal consequence of) rather than being annotated by
the relation ‘preceded by’ in the occurrence of any AE.
The relation ‘induced_by’ (used to define ‘causal adverse
event’) is a special case of ‘preceded by’ (used to define
‘adverse event’). For the logical definition of OAE ‘causal
adverse event’, the expression ‘induced_by’ is used instead
of ‘caused_by’ to justify and emphasize the fact that the
causality linking an adverse event to a medical interven-
tion is indirect and connected by multiple subprocesses in
a causal chain as detailed below.
In OAE, the term ‘causal adverse event’ is fully defined
with an equivalence class axiom as: ‘adverse event’ and
(‘induced_by’ some ‘medical intervention’), but the term
‘adverse event’ is not. This means that a ‘causal adverse
event’ can be recognized by an ontology reasoner but an
‘adverse event’ cannot. The reason is that there are other
criteria that have not been formalized to be reasoned for
being an adverse event other than merely an incident
that follows some medical intervention. For example, the
temporal association where a fever occurs one year after
receiving an influenza vaccination cannot be drawn as
it is most likely that this fever is not an adverse event
following that vaccination. It is difficult to infer that a
clinical outcome is an adverse event by a temporal associ-
ation alone.
Due to insufficient data or technology limitation, some
potential real ‘causal adverse event’ cannot be asserted.
Events of this sort are indistinguishable from non-causal
adverse events and will thus be annotated simply using
‘adverse event’.
Figure 2 OAE causal adverse event design pattern. All terms inside boxes are ontology classes, and the other terms are ontology relations.
The is-kind-of relations are highlighted with bold font. The other relations come from OAE or other existing ontologies. The detailed information
of the class and relation terms used in this figure is available in Additional file 1: Table S1 and Additional file 2: Table S2.
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 5 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
Further OAE modelling of sub-processes in a causal
adverse event chain
In the above section, we used “p2” to represent the ad-
verse event process leading to a clinically abnormal
outcome. While p2 adverse event process always occurs,
such a process may not be triggered by the medical inter-
vention (“p1”). When p2 is indeed triggered by p1, we call
such an adverse event ‘causal adverse event’. In this
section, we will study how a medical intervention can lead
to the clinically abnormal outcome in the case of a causal
adverse event.
Triggered by a medical intervention, we argue that a
causal adverse event process is indeed a chain composed
of a series of sub-processes. Specifically, a medical inter-
vention initiates a series of processes in which several
independent continuants (for example, anatomical parts
of the body of the patient) participate in a variety of ways.
Two neighboring processes in the series of processes share
at least one continuant (e.g., the same anatomic part)
among their participants. Other processes need not share
any continuant in this way. As shown in Figure 2, OAE
separates the causal chain of an adverse event process into
three subtypes of processes:
(i) Initial stage causal AE sub-process: This stage
happens immediately after medical intervention, and
the stage ends when the single chain process begins to
be forked (or separated) into different sub-processes,
some leading to positive preventative or therapeutic
effect, some leading to noises, and some leading to
adverse events.
(ii) Intermediate stage causal AE sub-process: One of
the forked sub-processes will be developed further in
a temporal fashion and may include a series of
intermediate smaller sub-processes, one of which
will lead to the last final stage as described below.
(iii)Late stage AE formation sub-process: This last stage
is the execution stage leading to pathological clinical
outcome (including the appearance of the outcome).
This stage is similar to the caspase cascade as the
execution stage of apoptotic cell death [27].
To illustrate the whole process, here we describe an
example of how the administration of an influenza vaccine
induces fever in human. After the vaccination process, the
vaccine comes to the bloodstream, attracts a large number
of immune cells, and triggers initial immune responses.
This stage is considered as an ‘initial stage sub-process
after medical intervention’. After the shared initial stage
triggered by the medical intervention, different inter-
mediate stage sub-processes will occur. Some of these
sub-processes will lead to a positive (intended) outcome,
i.e., adaptive immunity against infectious influenza virus
infection. Some sub-processes will lead to negative
(adverse) outcomes, i.e., various clinical abnormal out-
comes. More than one abnormal outcome may occur.
Some “noise” sub-processes leading to no positive or
negative outcomes may also occur. In the end of this
stage, those noise sub-processes will disappear. This
stage includes one ‘intermediate stage causal AE sub-
process’ that will result in the synthesis of the prostaglan-
din E2 (PGE2). The release of PGE2 will stimulate the
hypothalamus to increase body temperature, leading to
the appearance of fever [14]. The process from the release
of PGE2 to the fever outcome is the execution stage of the
fever outcome; therefore, it is regarded as the ‘late stage
AE formation sub-process” that directly results in the
pathological clinical outcome.
Representation of factors influencing adverse events
OAE provides a framework that allows the representation
and analysis of different factors and mechanisms that pos-
sibly influence adverse event outcomes. For example, two
major factors that determine distinct AEs associated with
killed and live attenuated influenza vaccines include the
viability of vaccine organism and the vaccination route
[8,10]. A killed influenza vaccine is administered through
intramuscular injection. A live attenuated influenza vac-
cine is administered through intranasal spray. While it is
still unclear whether the vaccination route affects the ad-
verse event outcomes [10], our linkage between adverse
events and vaccination routes provides us a way to sys-
tematically study this issue. Since OAE links the patients
to the adverse event (Figure 2), it is possible to link the pa-
tient records (e.g., age, gender, vaccine administered, and
vaccination method) to adverse events. An example is that
vaccinees in different age groups likely have different oc-
currence rates for specific AEs. Such age-AE associations,
clearly documented in vaccine package inserts, have been
ontologically recorded in our recent OAE-based study
[28]. Therefore, the OAE framework provides the compu-
tational infrastructure to model the relations between dif-
ferent factors and the clinical outcome.
Genetic background of a patient also affects the occur-
rence of the adverse event in this example. Knowledge of
intricate drug-patient and drug-drug interactions is also
crucial to determining final adverse drug event outcomes.
Some adverse events happen due to cross-interactions be-
tween drug and food (as for example in the case of statins
and grapefruit). A patient may have taken a medicine or
retain a pre-existing condition (e.g., drinking alcohol). The
alcohol may have an increased effect on some adverse
event induced by a drug (e.g., benzodiazepines). Through
the inclusion of a patient with specific conditions in the
OAE design pattern (Figure 3), OAE outlines the compu-
tational infrastructure with the capability to capture these
potential interaction mechanisms through ontological
linkages with the long-term goal of understanding the
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 6 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
fundamental basis of these specialized causal events. When
new evidences become known to support the likelihood of
a drug-AE causal association, appropriate measures can be
rationally designed to counter these adverse effects.
OAE adverse event hierarchy
Figure 3 lists many key ontology terms and their hier-
archical relations in OAE. As described above, the OAE
adverse event is a subtype of OGMS ‘pathological bodily
process’, which is a subtype of BFO:process. Different
types (subclasses) of adverse events exist and can be
classified on the basis of the type of medical intervention
(e.g., vaccine adverse event), anatomy (e.g., eye adverse
event), severity (e.g., severe adverse event), or causality
(e.g., causal adverse event). The ‘medical intervention’ is
an OBI ‘planned process’, another subtype of BFO:
process. Besides vaccination and drug administration,
other medical interventions include surgery process,
medical nutritional product usage, and medical device
usage (not shown in Figure 3). Each of the interventions
has a corresponding adverse event type (e.g., vaccine
adverse event). Different adverse event-related time
instances or periods are defined under BFO ‘temporal
region’. Both process and temporal region are types of
BFO ‘occurrent’ (Figure 3).
OAE imports many UBERON anatomy terms [29] for
logically defining the anatomic regions of those adverse
events classified by anatomy. UBERON is an integrated
cross-species ontology representing a variety of anatomical
entities [29]. The Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA)
[30] is domain ontology of the concepts and relationships
pertaining to the structural organization of the human
body. OAE uses species-neutral UBERON instead of
human-specific FMA for anatomic region representation
because OAE is also applicable for veterinary animal use.
A patient is an organism that has the role of a ‘patient
role’. The species of patients are specified by the NCBI
Taxonomy ontology [31]. Both anatomic entity and organ-
ism are types of BFO ‘material entity’. The material entity
and different types of information content entity are sub-
classes of BFO:continuant (Figure 3).
It is noted that the primary goal of current OAE devel-
opment is not to provide a comprehensive solution to
the causality problem. Instead, OAE merely specifies cer-
tain features of causal adverse events in order to provide
a first step towards a better understanding. It is typically
unlikely to assert an AE causality as a definite “yes” or “no”
conclusion. Instead, the AE causality is usually defined as a
probability or hypothesis. OAE has now incorporated terms
relating to a number of established methods used for AE
causality analysis. For example, it includes terms such as
‘Naranjo ADR Probability score’ that can be used to anno-
tate data concerning the likelihood of a causal adverse
drug reaction (ADR) based on a patient’s answers to a
list of pre-designed questions [32]. The CDISC system
[23] distinguishes five causality levels, including: (1) not
Figure 3 Key ontology terms in OAE. Except those with special labels, all arrows represent the same is-kind-of relations. Except those terms
labelled with ontology abbreviation names, all terms inside boxes come from OAE. The detailed information of the class and relation terms used
in this figure is available in Additional file 1: Table S1 and Additional file 2: Table S2.
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 7 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
related, (2) unlikely related, (3) possibly related, (4) prob-
ably related, and (5) definitely related. These types of caus-
ality have been represented in OAE as well. In addition,
AE case reports in a case reporting system such as VAERS
can be analysed statistically using methods such as filter-
ing based on a case number cutoff, proportional reporting
ratio (PRR) [33], and Chi-square test, in order to screen
for possible causal AEs [8]. To make more convincing
causality assessment using a statistical method, random-
ized, well-controlled experimental design for evaluating a
causality hypothesis is typically required [34,35]. These
statistical methods can be used to address any possible
‘causal adverse event hypothesis’. As exemplified in
Figure 3, terms relating to such methods have been
included in OAE. The various mechanisms for causality
assessment represented in OAE provide different options
for researchers and tool developers to assess the occurrence
and causes of adverse events.
The AE hierarchy demonstrates the general organization
of various AE terms in OAE. OAE defines many AE terms
based on medical intervention such as ‘drug adverse event’,
and ‘vaccine adverse event’. However, these terms are high
level terms, and OAE does not intend to represent specific
adverse events associated with each vaccine, drug, or
surgery. The majority of AE terms in OAE, such as
pneumonia AE and dry throat AE, are classified based
on clinical outcomes (including symptoms, signs, and
abnormal processes) and anatomic entities. Many terms
may fit under two or more parent AE terms. For example,
a ‘respiratory system inflammation AE’ may be asserted
under ‘respiratory system AE’ or ‘inflammation AE’. OAE
avoids the use of multiple inheritance. Our general strat-
egy is that when both a clinical outcome-based AE term
(such as ‘inflammation AE’) and an anatomy-based AE
term (such as ‘respiratory system AE’) are candidates for
being included as asserted terms in OAE, then we assert
the clinical outcome-based term (here: ‘inflammation
AE’), and allow the other parent term to be obtained by
reasoning. In this example, we assert the term ‘respiratory
system inflammation AE’ under ‘inflammation AE’, and
through reasoning (see the next section), it is inferred as a
child term of ‘respiratory system AE’ (Figure 4). The rea-
son of this choice is that the clinical outcome is often
more critical to the physicians and the location can be
easily defined using the UBERON anatomy ontology.
Usage
Current development of OAE has emphasized the repre-
sentation and analysis of adverse events associated with
vaccine and drug administrations. Several papers have
been published in terms of the application of OAE in
vaccine adverse event studies [8,14,28,36,37]. Two stud-
ies have been undergoing on using OAE in analysis of
drug adverse events. For better understanding of the
features and usage of OAE, these studies are introduced
below.
OAE-based vaccine adverse event studies
(1) Analysis of clinical vaccine adverse event case report data
The unsystematic reported vaccine AE cases in the
VAERS system contain both coincidental events and
those truly caused by vaccines. The data stored in such a
reporting system can be used to generate hypotheses
about potential causal association between adverse events
and medical interventions. Such a hypothesis, represented
by the OAE term causal adverse event hypothesis, be-
comes very important for attempts to improve the public
health when a dramatically large amount of cases are
reported following the same medical intervention.
To analyse reported adverse event cases, an OAE-based
AE analysis algorithm called Combinatorial, Ontology-
based Detection of AE (CODAE) was developed [8].
CODAE first extracts the VAERS VAE case report data
annotated by MedDRA. A set of well-recognized statistical
methods (containing filtering, Proportional Reporting Ratio
(PRR) [33], and Chi-square test) were then used to identify
statistically significant AEs associated with one or one
group of vaccines, e.g., live attenuated influenza vaccine
FluMist. It is noted that these statistical methods (e.g.,
Chi-square test) have been represented in the current ver-
sion of OAE. The usage of these statistic methods resulted
in the identification of a list of “enriched” AE terms that
are statistically significant compared to the background
noise recognized by all the AE case reports for all vaccines
collected in VAERS. Through MedDRA-OAE term
mapping, the statistically enriched AE terms can then
be classified and analysed using the OAE hierarchical
structure [8].
The CODAE strategy was used to analyse and compare
the AEs associated with two types of influenza vaccines:
trivalent (killed) inactivated influenza vaccine (TIV) and
trivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV). In the
USA, each year an average of 20,000 children under the
age of 5 are hospitalized because of influenza complica-
tions (http://www.cdc.gov/flu/protect/children.htm). The
single best approach to protecting oneself against seasonal
flu and its potentially severe complications is to receive a
seasonal influenza vaccine each year. However, a seasonal
influenza vaccine may also cause adverse side effects.
Using all possible data in the VAERS, our CODAE stat-
istical analysis identified 48 TIV-enriched and 68 LAIV-
enriched AEs (PRR > 2, Chi-square score >4, and the
number of cases >0.2% of total reports). The OAE-based
study on this CODAE AE classification method found that
TIV was more likely to be associated with neurological
and muscular abnormal processes such as paralysis,
movement disorders, and muscular weakness. In contrast,
LAIV-enriched AEs included inflammatory response and
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 8 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
respiratory system disorders. We also found that, although
rare, two severe adverse events (Guillain-Barre Syndrome
and paralysis) were more likely to be present in TIV-
vaccinated patients [8]. Such AE group enrichment results
were difficult to obtain without the support of OAE.
To demonstrate how OAE-based vaccine enrichment
works, we extracted all 14 respiratory system adverse
event terms associated with FluMist, the only LAIV vac-
cine in the market, from the CODAE analysis of influenza
vaccine AEs [8]. These terms and other related terms were
extracted using OntoFox [25] and visualized using the
Protégé OWL editor [38] (Figure 4). Different inflamma-
tory AEs in various anatomic regions (e.g., respiratory
system inflammatory AEs) have been asserted under in-
flammatory AE (Figure 4A). A located_in relation can
be used to logically define an anatomic region as the
location of a clinically abnormal process, for example,
located_in some respiratory system. After reasoning using the
HermiT OWL ontology reasoner (http://hermit-reasoner.
com/), the term ‘respiratory system inflammatory AE’ was
automatically inferred as a child of ‘respiratory system AE’
(Figure 4C). The inferred hierarchy can then be used for
AE group enrichment analyses.
The VAERS database includes unstructured case nar-
ratives that are not well-organized and used. The un-
structured narratives usually contain rich data about
the temporal features of the AEs. In another study, the
OAE was leveraged to model the temporal relations of
post-vaccination events [36]. The unstructured nature
of the narrative data, makes automatic processing difficult.
In the reported study [36], OAE, VO and the Clinical
Narrative Temporal Relation Ontology (CNTRO) [39]
were used to represent data in VAERS narratives in a
“machine-understandable” way, so that the data can be
easily queried and further analyzed. The usage of OAE
makes it possible to classify the extracted AE results. A
Figure 4 OAE classification of FluMist-associated adverse events (AEs). (A) Representation of those FluMist-associated adverse events (leave
nodes) and their asserted hierarchy. (B) An OAE axiom defining equivalent class ‘respiratory system AE’. (C) Inferred hierarchy after reasoning using
the HermiT reasoner available as a plugin in the Protégé-OWL editor in a Windows-7 computer. After reasoning, ‘respiratory system inflammation
AE’ is classified as ‘respiratory system AE’. By comparing the places of the term ‘respiratory system inflammation AE’ (highlighted with red oval
box) in (A) and (C), this term appears in both places in the inferred version in (C). This has not been moved, but an additional parent class has
been added. It is noted that the execution of the reasoning was finished within seconds.
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 9 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
VAERS case report was presented as a use case for the
ontological representations. The advantages of using the
ontology-based semantic web representation and data
analysis were emphasized [36]. It is noted that in order
to more specifically measure how OAE can be used for
improving AE classification, more statistical studies (e.g.,
analysis of precision and recall) will need to be conducted
in the future.
(2) Classification and analysis of vaccine adverse event
report in licensed vaccine package insert documents
The USA FDA website contains vaccine package insert
documents for commercial human vaccines currently
licensed in the USA [40]. The difference between this
study and the VAERS study introduced above is that in
contrast to the unsystematic treatment of clinical data by
VAE reports stored in VAERS, VAEs resting on licensed
vaccine package insert documents provide results from
randomized, well-controlled clinical trials. Therefore, the
adverse events recorded in the official vaccine package in-
serts are known vaccine-specific adverse events existing in
vaccinated populations.
To better analyse the data pertaining to known vaccine
adverse events, an Ontology of Vaccine Adverse Events
(OVAE) was recently developed as an OAE extension
[28]. OVAE was first used to represent the vaccine ad-
verse events reported in the FDA vaccine package insert
documents. OVAE imports from OAE terms referring to
87 distinct types of adverse events, which have been as-
sociated with 63 human vaccines licensed in the USA.
OVAE also imports information relating specific licensed
human vaccines taken from the Vaccine Ontology (VO).
By importing terms from OAE and VO, OVAE is able to
represent vaccine-specific AEs such as ‘Afluria-associated
pain AE’ and generate corresponding OVAE terms. OVAE
represents the VAE occurrences at specified age groups
for different vaccines as reported in the package inserts.
For example, according to the FDA-approved influenza
vaccine FluMist package insert document [41], the most
common adverse events in ≥10% FluMist recipients were
runny nose or nasal congestion (ages 2–49 years), fever
over 100°F (children ages 2–6 years), and sore throat
(adults ages 18–49 years). Vaccinees under different age
groups tend to have different occurrence rates for specific
AEs. For example, the pain adverse event associated with
influenza vaccine Afluria is > =60% for children 5–17 years
of age, > = 40% for adults 18–64 years of age, and > =10%
for adults 65 years of age and older [41]. Such information
is now clearly represented using ontological axioms in
OVAE. Therefore, the OVAE itself serves as a vaccine
adverse event knowledge base. By querying the OVAE
knowledge base, different scientific questions can be ad-
dressed. For example, OVAE was used to identify the
top 10 vaccines according to numbers of asserted VAEs
and the top 10 VAEs most frequently observed among
vaccines. Such a system can be used in combination
with VAERS to study VAEs systematically.
Such systematic retrieval and analysis of VAE results
recorded in the licensed vaccine package insert documents
could not have been performed without an ontology-
based approach. The use of OAE thus has advanced the
understanding of VAEs associated with licensed human
vaccines.
(3) Analysis of genetic susceptibility to vaccine adverse events
Adverse events following vaccination, also called vaccine
adverse event, were observed in some groups of people
but not in others. This phenomenon is due to variations
of the genetic factors altering individual’s susceptibility to
vaccine adverse events. Recently an Ontology of Genetic
Susceptibility Factors (OGSF) was applied and extended
to model genetic susceptibility and genetic susceptibility
factors associated with to vaccine adverse events [37]. A
genetic susceptibility factor is a material basis of some
genetic susceptibility. The OGSF ‘genetic susceptibility to
vaccine adverse event’, a subclass of OGSF ‘genetic sus-
ceptibility’, is realized in an OAE_0000004:vaccine adverse
event process. The genetic susceptibility factor exists as a
part of a human vaccinee genome. The human genetic
susceptibility factor will become a key participant in the
vaccine adverse event process. Two use cases were stud-
ied: one relating to the human gene allele DBR1*15:01 as
a genetic susceptibility factor that has been found to be a
cause of multiple sclerosis in association with the influ-
enza vaccine Pandemrix [42]; the other analyzing genetic
polymorphisms associated with smallpox vaccine adverse
events [43]. The OGSF modeling of these VAE specific
cases requires the importing of many adverse event terms
from OAE [37]. The combination of OGSF and OAE pro-
vides an effective way to represent and analyze the funda-
mental genetic mechanisms related with vaccine adverse
events in some human populations with specific genetic
characteristics.
From vaccine-based AE analysis to drug-based AE analysis
Vaccine is a type of biological drug. Vaccines differ
greatly from chemical drugs in many aspects. Firstly,
vaccines are prepared from killed or live attenuated mi-
crobial organisms or large molecules (e.g., recombinant
proteins). Chemical drugs, in contrast, are compounds of
small molecules. Host responses to vaccines and chemical
drugs may therefore differ dramatically. Secondly, infor-
mation relating to dose, time, and frequency is generally
known precisely for vaccine administration, but is for drug
administration often difficult to acquire. Thirdly, vaccines
are mostly a preventive measure administered to healthy
persons for disease prevention. In contrast, although pre-
ventive drugs exist, most drugs are given to patients under
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 10 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
a pre-existing condition of illness, and response to drug
treatment can be affected by both disease pathology and
disease progression.
There are differences, too, on the side of AE monitoring.
In the USA, vaccine AEs are monitored by the VAERS
while drug AEs are monitored by the FAERS system. And
for the reasons mentioned above, VAERS data on vaccine
AEs are less noisy compared to the corresponding drug
AE data in FAERS. Temporal association of an AE with a
vaccination administration is much easier to detect
than in the case of drug administration. Because vaccine
recipients will typically be in a state of health with no
other illnesses or complications prior to vaccination,
the occurrence of undesirable symptoms can easily be
hypothesized to have been induced by vaccination. As
OAE applications in the vaccine domain have begun to
yield useful interpretable results, the next step is to push
forward the OAE applications in the more complex
domain of drug AE analysis.
Several OAE-based drug AE analysis projects are in the
implementation phase. For example, based on published
drug package insert documents, OAE has been used to
represent and analyse neuropathy adverse events induced
by all possible chemical drugs [44]. This work is being
refined and conducted to analyse the mechanisms of
drug-induced neuropathy in patients. The FDA has been
interested in applying ontology-based systems pharmacol-
ogy to better analyse adverse drug reaction mechanisms
and predict drug toxicology [45,46]. Currently, the FDA is
investigating the usage of OAE as an adverse event data
infrastructure to lay a foundation for a mechanistic-based
systems pharmacology study of drug-induced cardiovascu-
lar toxicity [47,48]. In this case, OAE is being used as the
bridge between MedDRA terms and relevant biological
processes [47]. In addition, OAE is being used for litera-
ture mining of drug-drug and drug-molecule interactions
[15]. An integration of OAE-based FAERS data analysis
and literature mining has allowed the retrieval of gene
interaction networks associated with one or a group of
drug(s) and/or adverse events [48].
Discussion and conclusions
The major contributions of this manuscript includes: (1)
For the first time, we have formally announced and sys-
tematically described the new OAE ontology and how it
extends and differs from the previous AEO [12]. The im-
proved definition of ‘adverse event’ in current OAE makes
a major framework change comparing to the previous
(AEO) version of our ontology (Figures 1). The OAE term
‘causal adverse event’ now replaces the previous ‘adverse
event’ definition. The latter term is to be used to represent
individual adverse events known to be caused by medical
interventions – as in the case of a swelling and redness of
the skin at the injection site immediately after a flu shot.
This change allows OAE to represent adverse events
that are potentially not causal. This is aligned with the
treatment of ‘adverse event’ in current clinical adverse
event reporting systems, such as VAERS and FAERS. By
this change, OAE extends its capability of representing
reported adverse events. (2) We have now proposed the
design patterns of adverse events and causal adverse
events (Figures 1 and 2). These design patterns, together
with ontological structure (Figure 3), provide a framework
for systematic representation and analysis of adverse
events and the factors affecting the adverse events. (3) We
demonstrate that the OWL-based OAE ontology supports
asserted and inferred hierarchy and reasoning (Figure 4).
(4) Many new OAE terms have been added (Table 1). We
have selectively introduced many branches of new terms,
including those terms associated with causality assessments
and different time regions and processes. (5) Furthermore,
this article summarizes various works that represent many
research contributions made with the support of OAE.
Overall, OAE provides a unified and machine-readable
ontological platform for representation and analysis of
various adverse events and related issues (e.g., causality
assessment).
We are investigating or linking OAE with other related
ontologies and knowledge bases that is designed to support
a better understanding of complex adverse event processes.
VAERS and FAERS mandate the usage of MedDRA as a
controlled adverse event dictionary. MedDRA cannot be
used to organize multiple levels of classification except
through detailed knowledge provided by the users and the
construction of complex queries [49]. While MedDRA can-
not be ignored, an alignment between MedDRA and OAE
will make it possible to leverage the OAE ontological data
structure and the computational capability to utilize Med-
DRA data. The development of OAE is aligned with many
existing ontologies such as Vaccine (VO) and Infectious
Disease (IDO) Ontologies. The integration of OAE with
VO has resulted in the generation of the Ontology of Vac-
cine Adverse Events (OVAE). OAE can also be co-studied
with the Gene Ontology (GO), the Chemical Entities of
Biological Interest (ChEBI), and published gene expression
data resources to expand the networked adverse event
data to genetic and chemical information resources.
The evidences described in this paper or other previ-
ous papers have shown that OAE works in adverse
event representation and analysis. In the OAE-based
comparative analysis of adverse events associated with
trivalent (killed) inactivated influenza vaccine (TIV)
and trivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV)
[8], we have also provided a side-by-side comparison
on how OAE, MedDRA, and SNOMED classified the
TIV and LAIV-associated vaccine adverse events. The
comparative results were demonstrated in three sup-
plemental figures of the published paper, with their
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 11 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
titles: “Classification of TIV- and LAIV-enriched vaccine
adverse events using OAE”, “Classification of TIV- and
LAIV-enriched vaccine adverse events using MedDRA”,
and “Classification of TIV- and LAIV-enriched vaccine ad-
verse events using SNOMED-CT” [8]. The Discussion
section of that paper have also described and discussed
the comparative results [8]. This empirical evidence sug-
gests that OAE has clear advantages over MedDRA and
SNOMED in terms of adverse event classification. The de-
scriptions in current manuscript provide more theoretical
arguments. However, more empirical evidences would be
needed to provide stronger arguments on the possible
superiority of OAE over the alternatives.
Based on the evidences and theoretic arguments de-
scribed in this paper, we contend that OAE provides a
novel and powerful framework for analyzing possible
causal associations between medical interventions and
adverse events and the underlying mechanisms. The inte-
gration of OAE with other applications such as literature
mining makes it possible to systemically analyze molecular
mechanisms of adverse events. For example, OAE is being
used for literature mining of gene interaction networks
related to fever vaccine adverse events [14]. The OAE
can also be integrated with statistical analysis of AE case
report data [8] and potentially with high throughput
gene expression data analysis for better understanding
fundamental gene interactions and pathways of various
adverse events. Such studies will likely impact our ability
to diagnose, preventing, and treat adverse events in the
future.
Availability and requirements
The OAE project site is: http://www.oae-ontology.org.
OAE is listed in the OBO Foundry library (http://www.
obofoundry.org/). It is also available in the NCBO Bio-
Portal (http://bioportal.bioontology.org/) and in Onto-
bee (http://www.ontobee.org) for public visualization
and querying. The source code of the ontology is freely
available under the Apache License 2.0.
Additional files
Additional file 1: Table S1. Ontology classes used in the manuscript.
Additional file 2: Table S2. Ontology relations used in the manuscript.
Abbreviations
AEO: Adverse event ontology; AERO: Adverse event reporting ontology;
BFO: Basic formal ontology; BSPO: Spatial ontology; CDISC: Clinical data
interchange consortium; CODAE: Ontology-based detection of adverse
events; CTCAE: Common terminology criteria for adverse events;
DOID: Disease ontology; FAERS: FDA adverse events reporting system;
FDA: Food and Drug Administration (FDA); FMA: Foundational Model of
Anatomy; IAO: Information artifact ontology; IDO: Infectious disease
ontology; MedDRA: Medical dictionary for regulatory activities;
OAE: Ontology of adverse events; OBI: Ontology for biomedical
investigations; OBO: Open biomedical/biological ontologies;
OGMS: Ontology for general medical science; PATO: Phenotypic quality
ontology; PRR: Proportional reporting ratio; RO: Relation ontology;
TIV: Trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; LAIV: Live attenuated influenza
vaccine; UBERON: Uber anatomy ontology; VAERS: Vaccine adverse event;
VO: Vaccine ontology; WHO-ART: WHO’s adverse reaction terminology.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
YH initiated and leads the development of the AEO and OAE as the primary
developer. SS led the OAE case study on influenza vaccine AE analysis and
has started the OAE application in drug adverse event studies. ZX provided
technical support at the early stages of AEO/OAE development. AG
contributed modeling of neuropathy adverse events induced by chemical
drugs. SZ and DJ contributed to the addition of many AE terms to OAE
under the mentoring of YH and SS. YL suggested new OAE terms and has
applied OAE to vaccine adverse event susceptibility modeling. LT guided the
OAE modeling of drug adverse events in the domain of pharmacovigilance.
CT contributed time modeling analysis of vaccine adverse event. BS
contributed logical elements, including ensuring that OAE aligns with BFO.
All co-authors participated in writing, reviewing, discussion, and editing of
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The development of OAE is supported by the NIH National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases grant 1R01AI081062, and the NIH grant U54
DA021519 for the National Center for Integrative Biomedical Informatics.
Smith’s work on this paper was supported by NIAID grant R01AI77706 on
Immune System Biological Networks. The article-processing charge for this
article was paid by a discretionary fund from Dr. Robert Dysko, the director
of the Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine (ULAM) in the University of
Michigan. The significant contribution of Werner Ceusters in the early AEO
development is acknowledged and appreciated. We appreciate discussions
and comments from Melanie Courtot, Brink Ryan, and Alan Ruttenberg in
the development of OAE. We appreciate Darrell Abernethy and Keith
Burkhart for their consultation in the domain of clinical adverse event
reporting. The critical comments and suggestions provided by three
anonymous reviewers are also appreciated.
Author details
1University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 2US Food and Drug
Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA. 3Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany.
4University at Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
5University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
Received: 22 June 2013 Accepted: 27 June 2014
Published: 5 July 2014
References
1.
Scheuermann RH, Ceusters W, Smith B: Toward an Ontological Treatment
of Disease and Diagnosis. Proceedings of the 2009 AMIA Summit on
Translational Bioinformatics 2009, 116–120.
2.
Varricchio F, Iskander J, Destefano F, Ball R, Pless R, Braun MM, Chen RT:
Understanding vaccine safety information from the Vaccine Adverse
Event Reporting System. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2004, 23(4):287–294.
3.
FDA U: FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) (formerly AERS). 2013,
URL: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/
Surveillance/AdverseDrugEffects/default.htm, accessed on June 21, 2013.
4.
Brown EG, Wood L, Wood S: The medical dictionary for regulatory
activities (MedDRA). Drug Saf 1999, 20(2):109–117.
5.
NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE). http://
ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/ctc.html. Accessed on May 15, 2013.
6.
WHO’s Adverse Reaction Terminology (WHO-ART). http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
research/umls/sourcereleasedocs/current/WHO/. Accessed on March 17, 2013.
7.
Brown EG: Methods and pitfalls in searching drug safety databases
utilising the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA). Drug
Saf 2003, 26(3):145–158.
8.
Sarntivijai S, Xiang Z, Shedden KA, Markel H, Omenn GS, Athey BD, He Y:
Ontology-based combinatorial comparative analysis of adverse events
associated with killed and live influenza vaccines. PLoS One 2012, 7(11):e49941.
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 12 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
9.
He Y, Cowell L, Diehl AD, Mobley HL, Peters B, Ruttenberg A, Scheuermann
RH, Brinkman RR, Courtot M, Mungall C, Xiang Z, Chen F, Todd T, Colby LA,
Rush H, Whetzel T, Musen MA, Athey BD, Omenn GS, Smith B: VO: Vaccine
Ontology. In The 1st International Conference on Biomedical Ontology
(ICBO-2009): July 24–26 2009. Buffalo, NY, USA: Nature Precedings; 2009.
http://precedings.nature.com/documents/3552/version/1.
10.
Lin Y, He Y: Ontology representation and analysis of vaccine formulation
and administration and their effects on vaccine immune responses.
J Biomed Semantics 2012, 3(1):17.
11.
Ceusters W, Capolupo M, de Moor G, Devlies J, Smith B: An evolutionary
approach to realism-based adverse event representations. Methods Inf
Med 2011, 50(1):62–73.
12.
He Y, Xiang Z, Sarntivijai S, Toldo L, Ceusters W: AEO: a realism-based
biomedical ontology for the representation of adverse events. In Adverse
Event Representation Workshop, International Conference on Biomedical
Ontologies (ICBO-2011): July 26–30 2011. Buffalo, NY, USA: CEUR Workshop
Proceedings; 2011:309–315. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-833/paper359.pdf.
13.
Courtot M, Brinkman RR, Ruttenberg A: The logic of surveillance
guidelines: an analysis of vaccine adverse event reports from an
ontological perspective. PLoS One 2014, 9(3):e92632.
14.
Hur J, Ozgur A, Xiang Z, He Y: Identification of fever and vaccine-
associated gene interaction networks using ontology-based literature
mining. J Biomed Semantics 2012, 3(1):18.
15.
Gurulingappa H, Mateen-Rajput A, Toldo L: Extraction of potential adverse
drug events from medical case reports. J Biomed Semantics 2012, 3(1):15.
16.
Gurulingappa H, Rajput AM, Roberts A, Fluck J, Hofmann-Apitius M, Toldo L:
Development of a benchmark corpus to support the automatic extraction
of drug-related adverse effects from medical case reports. J Biomed Inform
2012, 45(5):885–892.
17.
Gurulingappa H, Toldo L, Rajput AM, Kors JA, Taweel A, Tayrouz Y:
Automatic detection of adverse events to predict drug label changes
using text and data mining techniques. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2013,
22(11):1189–1194.
18.
Smith B, Ashburner M, Rosse C, Bard J, Bug W, Ceusters W, Goldberg LJ,
Eilbeck K, Ireland A, Mungall CJ, Leontis N, Rocca-Serra P, Ruttenberg A,
Sansone SA, Scheuermann RH, Shah N, Whetzel PL, Lewis S: The OBO Foundry:
coordinated evolution of ontologies to support biomedical data integration.
Nat Biotechnol 2007, 25(11):1251–1255.
19.
Courtot M, Goldfain A, He Y, Ruttenberg A: Adverse Event Representation
Workshop. In International Conference on Biomedical Ontologies 2011 (ICBO
2011) 2011; University at Buffalo, NY; 2011. http://icbo.buffalo.edu/2011/
workshop/adverse-events.
20.
He Y, Toldo L, Burns G, Tao C, Abernethy DR: A 2012 Workshop: Vaccine
and Drug Ontology in the Study of Mechanism and Effect (VDOSME
2012). J Biomed Semantics 2012, 3(1):12.
21.
Tao C, He Y, Arabandi S: A 2013 Workshop: Vaccine and Drug Ontology
Studies (VDOS 2013). J Biomed Semantics 2014, 5(1):16.
22.
Zhou W, Pool V, Iskander JK, English-Bullard R, Ball R, Wise RP, Haber P, Pless
RP, Mootrey G, Ellenberg SS, Braun MM, Chen RT: Surveillance for safety after
immunization: Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)–United
States, 1991–2001. MMWR Surveill Summ 2003, 52(1):1–24.
23.
Burnstead B, Furlan G: Unifying drug safety and clinical databases. Curr
Drug Saf 2013, 8(1):56–62.
24.
Smith B, Ceusters W: Ontological realism: A methodology for coordinated
evolution of scientific ontologies. Appl Ontol 2010, 5:139–188.
25.
Xiang Z, Courtot M, Brinkman RR, Ruttenberg A, He Y: OntoFox: web-based
support for ontology reuse. BMC Res Notes 2010, 3:175.
26.
Grenon P, Smith B: SNAP and SPAN: Towards Dynamic Spatial Ontology.
Spat Cogn Comput 2004, 4(1):69–103.
27.
MacKenzie SH, Clark AC: Death by caspase dimerization. Adv Exp Med Biol
2012, 747:55–73.
28.
Marcos E, Zhao B, He Y: The Ontology of Vaccine Adverse Events (OVAE)
and its usage in representing and analyzing adverse events associated
with US-licensed human vaccines. J Biomed Semantics 2013, 4:40.
29.
Mungall CJ, Torniai C, Gkoutos GV, Lewis SE, Haendel MA: Uberon, an
integrative multi-species anatomy ontology. Genome Biol 2012,
13(1):R5.
30.
Rosse C, Mejino JL Jr: A reference ontology for biomedical informatics:
the Foundational Model of Anatomy. J Biomed Inform 2003, 36(6):478–500.
31.
NCBI Taxonomy ontology. http://www.obofoundry.org/cgi-bin/detail.cgi?
id=ncbi_taxonomy. Accessed on March 17, 2013.
32.
Naranjo CA, Busto U, Sellers EM, Sandor P, Ruiz I, Roberts EA, Janecek E,
Domecq C, Greenblatt DJ: A method for estimating the probability of
adverse drug reactions. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1981, 30(2):239–245.
33.
Evans SJ, Waller PC, Davis S: Use of proportional reporting ratios (PRRs) for
signal generation from spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2001, 10(6):483–486.
34.
Heaney RP, Kopecky S, Maki KC, Hathcock J, Mackay D, Wallace TC: A review
of calcium supplements and cardiovascular disease risk. Advances in
nutrition 2012, 3(6):763–771.
35.
Pearl J: Causality (2nd edition): Cambridge University Press; 2009.
36.
Tao C, He Y, Yang H, Gregory PA, Chute CG: Ontology-based time
information representation of vaccine adverse events in VAERS for
temporal analysis. J Biomed Semantics 2012, 3(1):13.
37.
Lin Y, He Y: The Ontology of Genetic Susceptibility Factors (OGSF) and its
application in modeling genetic susceptibility to vaccine adverse events.
J Biomed Semantics 2014, 5:19.
38.
The protege ontology editor. http://protege.stanford.edu/.
39.
Tao C, Wei WQ, Solbrig HR, Savova G, Chute CG: CNTRO: A Semantic Web
Ontology for Temporal Relation Inferencing in Clinical Narratives. AMIA
Annu Symp Proc 2010, 2010:787–791.
40.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Vaccines Licensed for Immunization
and Distribution in the US with Supporting Documents. URL: http://www.
fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM093830.
htm, accessed on April 3, 2013.
41.
US FDA Afluria package insert information. URL: http://www.fda.gov/
downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
UCM263239.pdf. Accessed on April 18, 2014.
42.
Vrethem M, Malmgren K, Lindh J: A patient with both narcolepsy and
multiple sclerosis in association with Pandemrix vaccination. J Neurol Sci
2012, 321(1–2):89–91.
43.
Reif DM, McKinney BA, Motsinger AA, Chanock SJ, Edwards KM, Rock MT,
Moore JH, Crowe JE: Genetic basis for adverse events after smallpox
vaccination. J Infect Dis 2008, 198(1):16–22.
44.
He Y: Updates on the development of the Ontology of Adverse Events
(OAE) and its applications. In The 2012 Vaccine and Drug Oontology in the
Study of Mechanism and Effect (VDOSME) workshop. Graz, Austria: 2012.
http://kr-med.org/icbofois2012/vdosme/docs/presentations/
OAE_VDOSME2012_He.pdf.
45.
Abernethy DR, Woodcock J, Lesko LJ: Pharmacological mechanism-based
drug safety assessment and prediction. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2011,
89(6):793–797.
46.
Bai JP, Abernethy DR: Systems pharmacology to predict drug toxicity:
integration across levels of biological organization. Annu Rev Pharmacol
Toxicol 2013, 53:451–473.
47.
Sarntivijai S, Lin Y, Blair E, Burkhart KK, He Y, Omenn GS, Athey BD,
Abernethy DR: The ontology representation of adverse events with
composite symptoms: expanding Ontology of Adverse Events to
describe drug-induced cardiotoxicity. In American Society for Clinical
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 2014 Annual Meeting (ASCPT-2014). Atlanta,
Georgia: 2014. http://www.ascpt.org/Portals/8/docs/Meetings/2014%
2020Annual%2020Meeting/Speaker%2020Presentations/Thursday/TKI_Sirarat
%2020Sarntivijai.pdf.
48.
Sarntivijai S, Hur J, Ozgur A, Burkhart KK, He Y, Omenn GS, Athey BD, Abernethy
DR: Predicting gene interactions of tyrosine kinase inhibitor-induced
cardiotoxicity with ontology of adverse events-assisted bioinformatics.
In American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 2014 Annual
Meeting (ASCPT-2014). Atlanta, Georgia: 2014.
49.
Bousquet C, Henegar C, Louet AL, Degoulet P, Jaulent MC: Implementation
of automated signal generation in pharmacovigilance using a
knowledge-based approach. Int J Med Inform 2005, 74(7–8):563–571.
doi:10.1186/2041-1480-5-29
Cite this article as: He et al.: OAE: The Ontology of Adverse Events.
Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014 5:29.
He et al. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2014, 5:29
Page 13 of 13
http://www.jbiomedsem.com/content/5/1/29
