 
 
ttp://iaeme.com/Home/journal/IJCET   
83 
editor@iaeme.com 
h
International Journal of Computer Engineering & Technology (IJCET) 
Volume 10, Issue 2, March April, 2019, pp. 83-90. Article ID: IJCET_10_02_010 
–
Available online at  
ttp://iaeme.com/Home/issue/IJCET?Volume=10&Issue=2 
h
Journal Impact Factor (2019
10.5167 (Calculated by GISI) www.jifactor.com 
): 
ISSN Print: 0976-6367 and ISSN Online: 0976 6375 
–
© IAEME Publication  
 
PREDICTING SAFETY INFORMATION OF 
DRUGS USING DATA MINING TECHNIQUE 
Dr. 
 Umarani
V.
* 
 Department of Computer Science, 
Sri Ramakrishna College of Arts and Science for Women, Coimbatore, India 
C. Rathika 
Department of Computer Science, 
Sri Ramakrishna College of Arts and Science for Women, Coimbatore 
*Corresponding Author 
ABSTRACT 
Data Classification is the application of data mining techniques to discover patterns 
from the micro array and biological datasets. This research entitled “PREDICTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAFTEY INFORMATION OF DRUGS USING DATA MINING TECHNIQUE” 
incorporates information theory, which is the process of deriving the information from 
the unsupervised dataset through feature selection. Finding the best features that are 
similar to a test data is challenging task in current data era. This research presents a 
 
 
 
framework  for discovering  best  feature selection  from  unsupervised datasets.  The 
proposed research work presents a new approach to measure the features (attributes) 
in drug prediction dataset using the methodologies namely, data cleaning, Adaptive 
Relevance Feature Discovery and Random Forest Classification. There are number of 
 
 
 
 
 
pharmacy companies are available in the market with multiple medicines for same 
problem.This prediction of drugs is used to prescribe the medicines for the patient’s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
disease by analyzing the history of the patient’s health.  Feature selection and 
dimensionality reduction is characterized by a regularity analysis where the feature 
values correspond to the number times that term appears in the dataset.  The relevance 
feature discovery method gives a useful measure is used to find the similarity features 
between data points are likely to be in terms of their features property. Some of the 
challenges faced in finding the best feature selection include positive, negative and 
inconsistency. This Proposed work proposes an enhanced Drug prediction based on 
Random Forest classification method to estimate the feature searching that is measured 
 
 
 
using  minimal redundancy  optimization  method  corresponding to  drug prediction 
dataset. 
Keywords: Random forest, data mining, healthcare, association rules, feature selection. 
Dr. V.Umarani and C. Rathika 
 
 
ttp://iaeme.com/Home/journal/IJCET   
84 
editor@iaeme.com 
h
Cite this Article: Dr. V.Umarani and C. Rathika, Predicting Safety Information of 
Drugs using Data Mining Technique, International Journal of Computer Engineering 
and Technology, 10(2), 2019, pp. 83-90. 
ttp://iaeme.com/Home/issue/IJCET?Volume=10&Issue=2
h
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Due to the rapid growth of digital data made available in recent years, knowledge discovery 
and data mining have attracted a great deal of attention with an imminent need for turning such 
data into useful information and knowledge. Many applications, such as market analysis and 
business management, can benefit by the use of the information and knowledge extracted from 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a large amount of data. Knowledge discovery can be viewed as the process of nontrivial 
extraction of information from large databases, information that is implicitly presented in the 
data, previously unknown and potentially useful for users.[1] 
Worsening of a drug’s risk- -benefit ratio can lead regulatory authorities to take actions 
to
aiming at mitigating or withdrawing the use of the drug. A very first step in such actions is the 
issue of a safety warning that has modest impact on the usage of a drug. One important way by 
which regulatory authorities may act on safety warning issuance is through prediction of side 
effects.[2] Prediction of drug’s side effects can help the Doctor and Pharmacist to prescribe the 
patients with exact medicine to the complaints. Therefore, predicting the side effects of drugs 
based on quantity of drugs can have a strong impact on the way of drugs used by physicians 
and patients.[3] 
Based on indication, the side effects of drug is predicted to deliver the exact reaction from 
different information. This work highly aids the Physicians and Pharmacist to prescribe the 
drugs according to p
 [4] 
atient’s complaint.
In section 2, the existing work pertaining to the study is discussed. Section 3 discusses about 
the phases involved in the proposed work and deals with the results. Section 4 concludes the 
work and presents the future directions of this research work. 
2. EXISTING WORK 
Drug is any substance that when taken into a living organism may modify one or more of its 
functions. Drugs can provide temporary relief from unhealthy symptoms and/or permanently 
supply the body with necessary substances the body can no longer make. Some drugs lead to 
an unhealthy dependency that has both physiological and behavioural roots [5]. Drug addiction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can cause serious, long-term consequences, including problems with physical and mental 
health, relationships, employment, and the law [6]. Decision tree uses the simple divide-and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conquer algorithm.  In these tree structures, leaves  represent  classes  and branches signify 
conjunctions of features that lead to those classes.  
2.1. DRAWBACKS 
 
• For data including categorical variables with different number of levels, information 
gain in decision trees is biased in favor of those attributes with more levels. 
 
• Calculations can get very complex, particularly if many values are uncertain and/or if 
many outcomes are linked. 
 
• Computing probabilities of different possible branches, determining the best split of 
each node, and selecting optimal combining weights to prune algorithms contained in 
the decision tree are complicated tasks that require much expertise and experience 
 
• It is difficult for the doctor to remember and to prescribe the number of medicines from 
different pharmaceutical companies. 
Predicting Safety Information of Drugs using Data Mining Technique 
 
 
ttp://iaeme.com/Home/journal/IJCET   
85 
editor@iaeme.com 
h
 
• Time consuming. 
 
• Needs manual calculations. 
2.2. PROPOSED WORK 
Data classification problems often have a large number of attributes, but not all of them are 
useful for classification. Irrelevant and redundant features may even reduce the classification 
accuracy. Drug prediction feature selection is a process of selecting a subset of relevant features, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which can decrease the dimensionality, shorten the running time, and/or improve the 
classification accuracy. Feature selection (FS) refers to the problem of selecting those input 
attributes that are most predictive of a given outcome; a problem encountered in many areas 
such as machine learning, pattern recognition and signal processing [7]. The proposed work 
attempts to use the uncertain information to improve the performance of drug prediction based 
on the real time information from FAERS. The utility of the approaches is demonstrated and 
compared empirically with several other dimensionality reduction techniques. [8] 
2.2.1. FEATURES 
 
 
 
 
• It is one of the most accurate learning algorithms available. For many data sets, it 
produces a highly accurate classifier. 
 
• It runs efficiently on large databases. 
 
• The accuracy of side effects of drugs based on indication number 
 
• It can find the most accurate detection using this technique. 
 
• A proper database is maintained for the drugs in the pharmacy to prescribe the OTC 
drugs. 
 
• To reduce the tedious work of a manual systems. 
 
• Helpful to Pharmacist and Physicians 
The figure 2.1 shows a clear picture of the proposed work. 
 
Fig 2.1 
Dr. V.Umarani and C. Rathika 
 
 
ttp://iaeme.com/Home/journal/IJCET   
86 
editor@iaeme.com 
h
3. METHODLOGY ANALYSIS 
The proposed architecture accepts the data classification parameters as input which contains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the R tool simulation where the novel prediction drug label changes in random forest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
classification algorithm is applied to the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) 
dataset. The users initialize the dataset instances, attributes and classes as initial parameters in 
which the classification process is to be evaluated. 
The following methodology is listed below, 
 
• Data Cleaning 
 
• Adaptive Relevance Feature Discovery 
 
• Classification and Regression Training 
3.1. DATA CLEANING 
Data cleaning method is kind of pre-processing technique it plays a very important role in data 
classification techniques and applications. It is the first step in the adaptive relevance feature 
discovery mining process. In this data cleaning process there are three key steps of procedures 
namely, Training set extraction, Feature Attribute selection and Filtering methods. 
The data pre-processing of untrained raw dataset is first partitioned into three groups: (1) a 
predetermined set of instance initiation, (2) the group of attributes (features, variables) and (3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the class of attribute. For each groups in the dataset, a reduction decision classification is 
constructed. For each reduction system is consequently divided into two parts: the training 
dataset and the testing dataset. Each training dataset uses the corresponding input features and 
fall into two classes: normal (+1) and abnormal (−1). 
The training set feature set process to compute the cross validation classification error for a 
large number of features and find a relatively stable range of small error. The Training feature 
selection is to select  (a preset large number) sequential features from the input .  
n
X
The Feature attribute selection is a statistical technique that can reduce the dimensionality 
of data as a by-product of transforming the original attribute space. Transformed attributes are 
formed by first computing the covariance matrix of the original features, and then extracting its 
sorting. The attribute selection defines a linear transformation from the original attribute space 
to a new space in which attributes are uncorrelated. 
The Filtering approach has much lower complexity than wrappers; the features thus selected 
often yield comparable classification errors for different classifiers, because such features often 
form intrinsic clusters in the respective subspace. 
3.2. ADAPTIVE RELEVANCE ROUGHSET FEATURE DISCOVERY 
 
 
 
The  adaptive  relevance  feature discovery process  considers the  mutual-information-based 
feature selection for both supervised and unsupervised data. For discrete feature variables, the 
integral operation in (1) reduces to summation. In this case, computing mutual information is 
straightforward, because both joint and marginal probability tables can be estimated by tallying 
the samples of categorical variables in the data.  
3.3. RANDOM FOREST CLASSIFICATION 
Random forests are a combination of tree predictors such that each tree depends on the values 
of a random vector sampled independently and with the same distribution for all trees in the 
forest. The generalization error for forests converges (i.e.,). to a limit as the number of trees in 
the forest becomes large. The generalization error of a forest of tree classifiers depends on the 
strength of the individual trees in the forest and the correlation between them. 
Predicting Safety Information of Drugs using Data Mining Technique 
 
 
ttp://iaeme.com/Home/journal/IJCET   
87 
editor@iaeme.com 
h
Random forest classifier creates a set of decision trees from randomly selected subset of 
training set. It then aggregates the votes from different decision trees to decide the final class 
of the test object. There are two stages in Random Forest algorithm, one is random forest 
creation, and other is to make a prediction from the random forest classifier created in the first 
stage.[9] 
3.4. CLASSIFICATION AND REGRESSION TRAINING 
 
 
 
Classification And Regression Training which is possibly the biggest project in R. This 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
package alone is all you need to know for solve almost any supervised machine learning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem. It provides a uniform interface to several machine learning algorithms and 
standardizes various other tasks such as  
 
• Data splitting  
 
• Pre-processing 
 
• Feature selection 
 
• Variable importance estimation 
In this work, data splitting is carried down in the FEARS dataset and Feature selection is 
done to extract only a specific type of drugs.  
3.5. DATASET  
A database is an organized mechanism that has the capability of storing information through 
which a user can retrieve stored information in an effective and efficient manner. The data is 
the purpose of any database and must be protected. 
The database design is a two level process. In the first step, user requirements are gathered 
together and a database is designed which will meet these requirements as clearly as possible.  
The dataset used for this project is a real data taken from the FDA Adverse Event Reporting 
System (FAERS).The data has been gathered from U.S. Food Drug Administration (FDA)[10] 
This data set consists of ASCII data files. These ASCII data files are '$' delimited; that is, a 
'$' is used to separate the data fields. These files can be imported into spreadsheet programs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as earlier versions of MS Excel. This excel sheet is converted into CSV format and 
implemented in R tool for classification of drugs according to the indication level which helps 
in  predicting  the side effects of the drugs.[11][12] 
The 
llowing figures 3.1, 3.2, 3.3shows the execution of the work in R environment. 
fo
 
Fig 3.1 
Dr. V.Umarani and C. Rathika 
 
 
ttp://iaeme.com/Home/journal/IJCET   
88 
editor@iaeme.com 
h
The above Fig represents the sequence of the drug that is consumed and the frequency of the consumption.  
 
Fig 3.2 
Fig 3.2 represents the drugs consumed for the respective diseases. 
 
Fig 3.3 
Fig 3.3 represents the side effects caused by the consumption of a particular drug with 
respect to the frequency of the drug consumed.  
4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE ENHANCEMENTS  
. 
The proposed work entitled PREDICTING SAFTEY INFORMATION OF DRUGS USING 
“
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATA MINING TECHNIQUE” is an R tool based application. This provides facility for 
guarantees to predict drug labels with sequence, drug name and reactions is able to detect drug 
predictions  by  considering  a  data  mining  techniques.  The  proposed  system  presented  an 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application of drug prediction using random forest classification using adaptive relevance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feature selection. The different steps in predictions are represented as the underlying data 
mining process of a classification.  
Predicting Safety Information of Drugs using Data Mining Technique 
 
 
ttp://iaeme.com/Home/journal/IJCET   
89 
editor@iaeme.com 
h
4.1. SCOPE OF FURTHER ENHANCEMENT 
This work shows a new way of predicting the side effects of drugs based on real data registered 
by the common people. Our future work will focus on the following: 
 
• For educating the pharmacist and public to lead better medical practices.  
 
• Also this data can be integrated with other types of datasets such as the patient’s history 
in hospital database health record.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• By integrating data from multiple available information sources, more effective 
prediction may be achieved. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Management for providing the seed funding assistance to 
carry out this research work. 
REFERENCES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1]
Andy W. Chen, Predicting adverse drug reaction outcomes with machine learning, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Community Medicine and Public Health, Chen AW. Int J 
Community Med Public Health. 2018 Mar;5(3):901-904  
 
[2]
Rajeev Kumar, Shivani Singh, Sudhir Arora, Savita Bhati,, Adverse Drug Reactions: A 
 
Comprehensive Review,  Journal of Drug Delivery & Therapeutics. 2018; 8(1):103-107     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[3]
Daniel M. Bean, Honghan Wu, Ehtesham Iqbal, Olubanke Dzahini, Zina M. Ibrahim, 
 
Matthew Broadbent, Robert Stewart & Richard J. B. Dobson, Knowledge graph prediction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of 
unknown 
adverse 
drug 
reactions 
and 
validation 
in 
electronic 
health 
 
records,www.nature.com/scientific  reports  7: 16416  |  DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-16674-
x,2017 
 
 
[4]
Gurulingappa H, Mateen-Rajput A, Toldo L. Extraction of Adverse Drug Effects from 
 
Medical Case Reports. J Biomed Semantics 2012; 3: 15.  
 
[5]
Gurulingappa H, Rajput AM, Roberts A, et al., Development of a benchmark corpus to 
 
support the automatic extraction of drug-related adverse effects from medical case reports. 
J Biomed Inform 2012; 45(5): 885 892. 
–
 
[6]
-Bao Ho1,2*, Ly Le3, Dang Tran Thai1 and Siriwon Taewijit1,4, Data-driven Approach 
 
Tu
to Detect and Predict Adverse Drug Reactions, Current Pharmaceutical Design, , 22, 000-
000,2016 
 
[7]
Kalpana Raja, Matthew Patrick, James T. Elder & Lam C. Tsoi, Machine learning workflow 
 
to enhance predictions of Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs) through drug-gene interactions: 
application to drugs for cutaneous diseases,www.nature.com/Scientific Reports | 7: 3690  | 
DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03914-3 
 
[8]
Kuhn M, Campillos M, Letunic I, et al. A side effect resource to capture phenotypic effects 
 
of drugs. Mol Syst Biol 2010.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[9]
S.Preethi,  C.Rathika, An Efficient First Order Logical  Casual Decision  Tree  in  High 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dimensional Dataset, International Journal of Computer Sciences and Engineering, 
Volume-6 , Issue-2 , Page no. 73-78, Feb-2018 
 
[10]
DuMouchelW, Bayesian DataMining in Large Frequency Tables, with an Application to 
 
the FDA Spontaneous Reporting System. Am Stat 1999; 53(3): 177 190. 
–
 
[11]
Ahmed I, Thiessard F, Miremont-Salamé G, et al. Pharmacovigilance Data Mining With 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Methods Based on False Discovery Rates: A Comparative Simulation Study. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther 2010; 88(4): 492 498. 
–
 
[12]
Ahmed I, Poncet A. PhViD: a R package for PharmacoVigilance signal Detection. 2011. 
 
Dr. V.Umarani and C. Rathika 
 
 
ttp://iaeme.com/Home/journal/IJCET   
90 
editor@iaeme.com 
h
AUTHOR
 PROFILE 
’S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. 
 Umarani received her Ph.D Degree in Science and Humanities (Compute
V.
r 
Applications) from Anna University, Chennai in 2013. She is currently working as Associate 
Professor in Sri Ramakrishna College of Arts and Science for Women, Coimbatore. She has 19 
years of experience in teaching. Her research interests are Data mining, Big data analytics and 
machine learning. She has published twenty research papers in Journals and presented many 
research papers in National and International Conferences in India and abroad. She is currently 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
guiding  2 Ph.D scholars. She has  guided 12 M.Phil scholars, She  is a life member  of 
International Association of Engineers.(IAENG).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mrs. 
 Rathika 
 currently working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of 
C.
is
Computer Science at Sri Ramakrishna College of Arts and Science for Women. 
he 
in year 2009. S
is currently pursuing her Doctorate degree in computer science at Sri Ramakrishna College of 
Arts and Science for Women. She has 17 years of experience in teaching. Her research areas 
include Data mining and Big Data analytics. She has guided 6 M.Phil scholars. She acted as an 
Adjunct Faculty for a period of one month in Texila American University, South America to 
develop the curriculum for the course Diploma in Information Technology. She published 8 
papers in International Journals and presented papers in international and national Conferences.  
